[serve] Cursor support, move docs into separate page, add more examples (#39133)
huggingface/transformers: docs/source/en/serving.md

    --task generate \
    --model-impl transformers \
    --trust-remote-code
```

## Serve CLI

> [!WARNING]
> This section is experimental and subject to change in future versions

<!-- TODO: LLMs -> models, after we add audio/image input/output support -->
You can serve `transformers`-compatible LLMs with `transformers serve`. The server has a chat completion API compatible with the OpenAI SDK, so you can also quickly experiment with `transformers` models on existing aplications. To launch a server, use the `transformers serve` CLI:

```shell
transformers serve
```

<!-- TODO: either fully align the two APIs, or link to the `transformers` version instead -->

> This server takes an extended version of the [`ChatCompletionInput`](https://huggingface.co/docs/huggingface_hub/v0.33.1/en/package_reference/inference_types#huggingface_hub.ChatCompletionInput), accepting a serialized `GenerationConfig` in its `extra_body` field for full `generate` parameterization. The CLI will dynamically load a new model as needed, following the `model` field in the request.

Author: (I'm going to iterate on the docs to add Cursor as an example, and I'll experiment with an advanced usage section where this sort of info will live. I'll ping you when it's ready)

The simplest way to interact with the server is by sending an HTTP request with `cURL`, e.g.

```shell
curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/v1/chat/completions -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"messages": [{"role": "system", "content": "hello"}], "temperature": 0.9, "max_tokens": 1000, "stream": true, "model": "Qwen/Qwen2.5-0.5B-Instruct"}'
```

from which you'll receive multiple chunks

```shell
data: {"object": "chat.completion.chunk", "id": "req_0", "created": 1751377863, "model": "Qwen/Qwen2.5-0.5B-Instruct", "system_fingerprint": "", "choices": [{"delta": {"role": "assistant", "content": "", "tool_call_id": null, "tool_calls": null}, "index": 0, "finish_reason": null, "logprobs": null}]}

data: {"object": "chat.completion.chunk", "id": "req_0", "created": 1751377863, "model": "Qwen/Qwen2.5-0.5B-Instruct", "system_fingerprint": "", "choices": [{"delta": {"role": "assistant", "content": "", "tool_call_id": null, "tool_calls": null}, "index": 0, "finish_reason": null, "logprobs": null}]}

(...)

> ```

Reviewer: After the curl command (or maybe even _instead of_), I'd show how to use `transformers chat http://localhost:8000 --model_name_or_path <model_id>` to connect to the server with a barebones CLI.

This server is also an MCP client, which can receive information available MCP servers (i.e. tools), massage their information into the model prompt, and prepare calls to these tools when the model commands to do so. Naturally, this requires a model that is trained to use tools.

> [!TIP]

> > At the moment, MCP tool usage in `transformers` is limited to the `qwen` family of models.

Reviewer: Nice! Would love to follow along! 🔥

```bash
Agent loaded with 1 tools:
 • flux1_schnell_infer
»  Generate an image of a cat on the moon
<Tool req_0_tool_call>flux1_schnell_infer {"prompt": "a cat on the moon", "seed": 42, "randomize_seed": true, "width": 1024, "height": 1024, "num_inference_steps": 4}

Tool req_0_tool_call
[Binary Content: Image image/webp, 57732 bytes]
The task is complete and the content accessible to the User
Image URL: https://evalstate-flux1-schnell.hf.space/gradio_api/file=/tmp/gradio/3dbddc0e53b5a865ed56a4e3dbdd30f3f61cf3b8aabf1b456f43e5241bd968b8/image.webp
380576952

I have generated an image of a cat on the moon using the Flux 1 Schnell Image Generator. The image is 1024x1024 pixels and was created with 4 inference steps. Let me know if you would like to make any changes or need further assistance!
```

### Example 2: Jan and serving in a different machine

This subsection showcases how to use `transformers serve` as a local LLM server within the [Jan](https://jan.ai/) app. Jan is a ChatGPT-alternative graphical interface interface, with a focus on local models.

> To connect `transformers server` with Jan, you'll need to set up a new model provider ("Settings" > "Model Providers"). Click on "Add Provider", and set a new name. In your new model provider page, all you need to set is the "Base URL" to following pattern

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To connect `transformers serve` with Jan, you'll need to set up a new model provider ("Settings" > "Model Providers"). Click on "Add Provider", and set a new name. In your new model provider page, all you need to set is the "Base URL" to the following pattern:
```

```
http://[host]:[port]/v1
```

> where `host` and `port` are the `transformers serve` CLI parameters (`localhost:8000` by default). After setting this up, you should be able to see some models in the "Models" section, hitting "Refresh". Make sure you add a Hugging Face Hub API key too. Your custom model provider page should look like this:

Author: no it doesn't, I'll clarify in the text

<h3 align="center">
    <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/transformers/transformers_serve_jan_model_providers.png"/>
</h3>

You are now ready to chat!

> [!TIP]

> > You can add any `transformers`-compatible model to Jan through `transformers server`. In the custom model provider you created, click on the "+" button in the "Models" section and add its Hub repository name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> You can add any `transformers`-compatible model to Jan through `transformers serve`. In the custom model provider you created, click on the "+" button in the "Models" section and add its Hub repository name.
```

> To conclude this example, let's look into a more advanced use-case. If you have a beefy machine to serve models with, but prefer using Jan on a different device, you need to add port forwarding. If you have `ssh` access from your Jan machine into your server, this can be accomplished by typing the following to your Jan machine's terminal

Reviewer: Before this, perhaps we could mention how to run against a computer in your local network by simply launching `transformers serve` using `--host`.

```

> ssh -N -f -L localhost:8000:localhost:8000 your_server_account@your_server_IP -p port_to_ssh_into_your_server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ssh -N -f -L 8000:localhost:8000 your_server_account@your_server_IP -p port_to_ssh_into_your_server
```

<h3 align="center">
    <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/transformers/transformers_serve_jan_model_providers.png"/>
</h3>

You are now ready to chat!

> [!TIP]
> You can add any `transformers`-compatible model to Jan through `transformers serve`. In the custom model provider you created, click on the "+" button in the "Models" section and add its Hub repository name, e.g. `Qwen/Qwen3-4B`.

To conclude this example, let's look into a more advanced use-case. If you have a beefy machine to serve models with, but prefer using Jan on a different device, you need to add port forwarding. If you have `ssh` access from your Jan machine into your server, this can be accomplished by typing the following to your Jan machine's terminal

```
ssh -N -f -L 8000:localhost:8000 your_server_account@your_server_IP -p port_to_ssh_into_your_server
```

Port forwarding is not Jan-specific: you can use it to connect `transformers serve` running in a different machine with an app of your choice.

### Usage example 2: apps with external requests (feat. Cursor)

> This example shows how to use `transformers serve` as a local LLM provider for [Cursor](https://cursor.com/), the popular IDE. Contrarily to the example above, requests to `transformers serve` will come from an external IP (Cursor's server IPs), which require some additional setup. Furthermore, some of Cursor's requests require [CORS](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Guides/CORS) mechanisms enabled in our local server, and they are disabled by default for security reasons.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example shows how to use `transformers serve` as a local LLM provider for [Cursor](https://cursor.com/), the popular IDE. Unlike in the previous example, requests to `transformers serve` will come from an external IP (Cursor's server IPs), which requires some additional setup. Furthermore, some of Cursor's requests require [CORS](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Guides/CORS), which is disabled by default for security reasons.
```
